PEP 780: ABI features as environment markers (#4315)
python/peps: peps/pep-0780.rst

available as a non standard build option). If it persists, the inverse need for
the ABI feature detection may arise.

Indeed, in all three phases it may be necessary for package authors to choose
specific versions of their dependencies based on the ABI features, with a shift
from GIL-enabled as default to free-threading as default over time.

The ABI features are designed with this in mind to guarantee usefulness and
simplicity for the foreseeable future in a changing Python ecosystem.

Specification
=============

The keywords "**MUST**", "**MUST NOT**", "**REQUIRED**", "**SHALL**",
"**SHALL NOT**", "**SHOULD**", "**SHOULD NOT**", "**RECOMMENDED**", "**MAY**",
and "**OPTIONAL**"" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
:rfc:`RFC 2119 <2119>`.

Concepts
--------

ABI features are a clear description of certain properties of the Python
interpreter. While some of these features can be queried already today, they
are not easily nor uniformly accessible.

Hence, the proposed feature MUST be made available via the Python standard
library as ``sys.abi_features``, and as the new environment marker variable

> ``sys_abi_features``.

Reviewer: Editorial: I don't think this subsection adds much, the first paragraph is covered above (in *Rationale* & *Motivation*) and the second paragraph is covered below (in the remainder of *Specification*).

All interpreters MUST handle the following ABI features as stated.
ABI features that are restricted to particular interpreters MUST NOT be
provided by other interpreters.
The features are subdivided into groups and for each group there MUST be
exactly one feature present, except when the group is marked as optional, in
which case there MUST be at most one feature present.

``free-threading`` or ``gil-enabled`` (only CPython)
    If the Python interpreter is free-threaded, the ``free-threading`` feature
    MUST be present and the ``gil-enabled`` feature MUST NOT be present.
    Otherwise, the ``gil-enabled`` feature MUST be present and the
    ``free-threading`` feature MUST NOT be present.

``debug`` (only CPython, optional)
    This ABI feature is reserved for the ``--with-pydebug`` build of CPython.
    If the interpreter is a CPython interpreter with ``Py_DEBUG`` capabilities,
    the ``debug`` feature MUST be present.
    On POSIX systems, this corresponds to ``"d" in sys.abiflags``.

``32-bit`` or ``64-bit`` (optional)
    The bitness of the interpreter, that is, whether it is a 32-bit or 64-bit
    build [#bitness]_. If the bitness is unknown or neither 32-bit nor 64-bit,

>     this feature MUST NOT be present.

Reviewer: I'm unclear on the rationale for having bitness be optional, especially given the motivating example of replacing `sys.maxsize`.

Do these values work for e.g. MicroPython?

Author: We are not aware of other needed values, certainly not in CPython. MicroPython is an interesting case, as it [supports some 16-bit platforms](https://github.com/micropython/micropython?tab=readme-ov-file#supported-platforms--architectures). It's reasonable to assume such an interpreter would need `16-bit`, but I'm not sure.

So overall, keeping it optional is meant to provide room for exotic interpreters, but it maybe reasonable to tighten it down and rather ask maintainers of such interpreters to come forward with required additions.
I guess that is reason enough to have this discussion with the wider community.

Addition to the Python Standard Library
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

Making the ABI features available in an easily accessible, expressive,
standardized way is useful beyond the scope of environment markers.
For example, ``"32-bit" in sys.abi_features`` is much more expressive than the
current standard test of comparing ``sys.maxsize`` with  ``2**32``, which can
be found more than ten thousand times on GitHub.
If one wants to determine whether the interpreter is a debug build, there is

> currently no standardized, cross platform way to do so.

Reviewer: Is it worth mentioning somewhere that e.g. `sys.abiflags` doesn't exist on Windows, but `sys.abi_features` will exist on every supported platform?

Author: I added a clause to that effect. Thanks!

Hence, the `ABI Features`_ listed above are added to the Python standard
library.

Since they are all the result of compile time choices describing basic features
of the interpreter, the most intuitive place to put them is in ``sys``.
Since there is no intrinsic order, nor a possibility for duplication, they are
added as a ``frozenset`` of strings.

All Python interpreters MUST provide the ``sys.abi_features`` attribute as a
``frozenset`` of strings, which MUST contain only the `ABI Features`_ that are
defined in this PEP or in a subsequent PEP.

An example value would be ``sys.abi_features == frozenset({"free-threading",
"debug", "32-bit"})`` on a free-threaded debug build for win32.

> Environment Markers
> '''''''''''''''''''

Reviewer: Editorial: likewise
```suggestion
``sys_abi_features`` environment marker
---------------------------------------
```

specifiers with the same semantics as the ``sys.abi_features`` attribute
proposed above.

To do this, we need to extend the grammar laid out in :pep:`508` and maintained
in the :ref:`packaging:dependency-specifiers` and document the possible values.

The grammar is extended to include the ``sys_abi_features`` marker variable by
augmenting the definition of ``env_var`` as follows::

    env_var       = ('python_version' | 'python_full_version' |
                     'os_name' | 'sys_platform' | 'platform_release' |
                     'platform_system' | 'platform_version' |
                     'platform_machine' | 'platform_python_implementation' |
                     'implementation_name' | 'implementation_version' |
                     'sys_abi_features' |
                     'extra' # ONLY when defined by a containing layer
                     )

Like the grammar, also the overview table of environment markers in
:ref:`packaging:dependency-specifiers` is augmented to add the following row:

.. list-table::
    :header-rows: 1

    * - Marker
      - Python equivalent
      - Sample values
    * - ``sys_abi_features``
      - ``sys.abi_features`` [#sys-abi-features]_

>       - ``set()``, ``{"free-threading"}``, ``{"free-threading", "debug"}``

Reviewer: Editorial: 
```suggestion
      - ``frozenset()``, ``frozenset({'free-threading', '64-bit'})``,
        ``frozenset({'gil-enabled', 'debug', '32-bit'})``
```

With these additions, ABI features can be used in dependency specifications via
the ``in`` operator to test for the presence of a feature, or the ``not in``

> operator to test for the absence of a feature.

Reviewer 2: Could you add a sentence about how bad comparisons such as `"3.10.0" < "sys_abi_features"` should be treated? (As someone who has to support such checks already for other environment markers such as `extra`, I'd prefer to both allow to both error and allow to evaluate to false, at the implementations choice)

Reviewer 2: I'm happy if we agree that the marker introduced by this PEP uses the same semantics for set-based markers as defined by PEP 751.

tools which may already be used to install dependencies---i.e. malicious
dependencies may be specified here, just as they may be specified in
``requirements.txt`` files.

How to Teach This
=================

The use of environment markers is well established and communicated chiefly
in :ref:`packaging:dependency-specifiers`.
The new environment marker can be introduced in the same document.
Additionally, both for package authors and users, free-threading specific
guidance can be provided at the `Python free-threading guide`_.
The new ``sys.abi_features`` attribute will be documented in the Python
standard library documentation.

Reference Implementation
========================

The reference implementation for the ``sys.abi_features`` attribute can be
found in `Add abi_features to sys
<https://github.com/zklaus/cpython/pull/1>`__.

The reference implementation for the environment markers is available in a fork
of the ``packaging`` library at `Environment markers for ABI features
<https://github.com/zklaus/packaging/pull/1>`__.

`A demonstration package <https://github.com/zklaus/env-marker-example>`__ is
also available.

> Since ``pip`` uses a vendored copy of ``packaging`` internally, we also provide
> `a patched version of pip
> <https://github.com/zklaus/pip/tree/env-marker-free-threading>`__, which is
> based on pypa/pip:main with the vendored ``packaging`` replaced by the
> reference implementation linked above.

Reviewer: Editorial:
```suggestion
Since ``pip`` uses a vendored copy of ``packaging`` internally, we also provide
`a patched version of pip`__, which replaces the vendored ``packaging`` with the
reference implementation linked above.

__ https://github.com/zklaus/pip/tree/env-marker-free-threading
```

PEP: 780
Title: ABI features as environment markers
Author: Klaus Zimmermann <klaus_zimmermann@gmx.de>,
        Ralf Gommers <ralf.gommers@gmail.com>
Sponsor: Lysandros Nikolaou <lisandrosnik@gmail.com>
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Topic: Packaging
Created: 21-Mar-2025
Python-Version: 3.14
Post-History:
  `05-Aug-2024 <https://discuss.python.org/t/60007>`__,

..
    If accepted, the contents of this PEP should be integrated into the
    canonical documentation in the Python Packaging User Guide and the
    following directive should be added here:
    .. canonical-pypa-spec:: :ref:`packaging:dependency-specifiers`

Abstract
========

This PEP defines using ABI features as environment markers for project
dependencies, through a new ``sys_abi_features`` environment marker and
:data:`!sys.abi_features` attribute in the :mod:`sys` module.
:pep:`508` (later moved to :ref:`packaging:dependency-specifiers`) introduced
environment markers to specify dependencies based on rules that describe

> when the dependency should be used.

Reviewer 3: For packaging proposes, we can reference how [`conda`](https://github.com/conda/conda) handles this: the [virtual packages](https://docs.conda.io/projects/conda/en/stable/user-guide/tasks/manage-virtual.html#managing-virtual-packages).

> ## Managing virtual packages
> 
> "Virtual" packages are injected into the conda solver to allow real packages to depend on features present on the system that cannot be managed directly by conda, like system driver versions or CPU features. Virtual packages are not real packages and not displayed by `conda list`. Instead `conda` runs a small bit of code to detect the presence or absence of the system feature that corresponds to the package. The currently supported list of virtual packages includes:
> 
> - `__cuda`: Maximum version of CUDA supported by the display driver.
> - `__osx`: OSX version if applicable.
> - `__glibc`: Version of glibc supported by the OS.
> - `__linux`: Available when running on Linux.
> - `__unix`: Available when running on OSX or Linux.
> - `__win`: Available when running on Win.
> - `__conda`: Version of conda that is being used for solving.
> 
> Other virtual packages will be added in future conda releases. These are denoted by a leading double-underscore in the package name.

IMO, the virtual package approach is better than the boolean markers (present or absent). The virtual package is more expressive:

```yaml
requirements:
  - __unix 0.0
  - __osx >=15.0
  - __freethreading 0.0
```

```yaml
requirements:
  - __unix 0.0
  - __glibc >=2.28
  - __freethreading 0.0
  - __cuda >= 12.8
```

Reviewer 4: Let's not do that here please. That will only be confusing and potentially derail the discussion. We already have the marker syntax, that's what we need to work within. Conda's virtual packages are nice and in several ways more elegant than what Python packaging standards offer, but they're not really relevant to this PEP.

Reviewer: @XuehaiPan please bring up this idea on the Discourse thread, once it is created.

Reviewer 3: > We already have the marker syntax, that's what we need to work within.

Fair enough. I just want to point out how other package managers do for a similar purpose. :)

PEP: 780
Title: ABI features as environment markers
Author: Klaus Zimmermann <klaus_zimmermann@gmx.de>,
        Ralf Gommers <ralf.gommers@gmail.com>
Sponsor: Lysandros Nikolaou <lisandrosnik@gmail.com>

> Discussions-To: https://discuss.python.org/t/60007

Reviewer: As previously suggested, leaving out Discussions-To for now (until the PR is merged, per the checklist)
```suggestion
```

Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track

> Topic: Packaging

Reviewer: @pfmoore question from a governance perspective, as PEP-0776 is to be split into two parts (packaging & non-packaging). Do you have similar thoughts here? The PEP proposes both a new `sys.abi_features` attribute and a new `sys_abi_features` environment marker.

Reviewer 5: Unfortunately, I think it does.

It may be possible to handle the new marker without a second PEP - I'd be willing to support adding `sys_abi_features` to the marker spec as a simple update to the specification. It would still need raising on the packaging Discourse, though. And there would be questions about how tools running under versions of Python without the new sys attribute should handle the marker, so it's not completely uncontroversial.

Reviewer 5: Looking at the PEP itself, I see that it introduces the idea of markers which are set objects. That's something that PEP 751 also introduces - the PEP authors here should probably look at PEP 751 (which is currently being reviewed for approval by me) to ensure they don't contradict what's being said there. I *think* it's compatible, but I haven't checked thoroughly.

Reviewer 6: It might make sense to treat this only as a packaging PEP, since the changes to CPython itself seem small enough to be handled without a PEP. So the approval process would be a packaging PEP for the new markers, plus standard core dev consensus for the related CPython changes.

Author: Thanks for the feedback, that makes sense!

Shall we then discuss this as a packaging PEP and once we have community agreement on names and content make the necessary additions to CPython?

Reviewer 4: It'd be nice to unresolve this comment, since it was just brought up again on Discourse.

Created: 21-Mar-2025

> Python-Version: 3.14

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Python-Version: 3.14
Post-History:
  `5 Aug 2024 <https://discuss.python.org/t/60007>`__,
```

..
    If adopted, the contents of this pep should be integrated into the
    canonical documentation in the Python Packaging User Guide and the
    following directive should be added here:
    .. canonical-pypa-spec:: :ref:`packaging:dependency-specifiers`

Abstract
========

This PEP defines new environment markers for project dependencies.
:pep:`508` (later moved to :ref:`packaging:dependency-specifiers`) introduced
environment markers to specify dependencies based on rules that describe
when the dependency should be used.
This PEP extends the environment markers to allow specifying dependencies
based on specific ABI features of the Python interpreter.
For this, it defines a set of `ABI Features`_ and specifies how they are made
available via an `Addition to the Python Standard Library`_ in the form of a

> new attribute ``sys.abi_features``, as well as for `Environment Markers`_ as a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
new attribute :data:`!sys.abi_features`, as well as for `Environment Markers`_ as a
```

new marker variable, ``sys_abi_features``.

Motivation
==========

> :pep:`508` established environment markers to specify dependencies based on
> environment conditions. Since its adoption in 2015, the Python ecosystem has
> evolved and new features warrant their own environment markers.
> 
> The primary motivation for extending the allowed set of environment markers now
> is free-threaded CPython [#python-free-threading]_ emerging. Currently there is

Reviewer: I think this could be tightened up -- this PEP only proposes one new environment marker for ABI features. Perhaps (though you may want to rephrase):

```suggestion
In 2015, :pep:`508` established environment markers to specify dependencies
based on environment conditions.
The development of free-threaded CPython [#python-free-threading]_
has underlined the need for an environment marker to discriminate between
different ABI features that the interpreter was built with.
For example, currently there is
```

no way to distinguish between a GIL-enabled and a free-threaded CPython
interpreter with an environment marker. This leads to real world issues for the
adoption of free-threading and its incremental rollout. When a Python package
is being made compatible with free-threaded CPython, it also needs all its
build and runtime dependencies to be compatible. Capturing the first version of
a dependency that is compatible precisely in metadata is currently not
possible, and increasing the minimum version of a dependency also for the
GIL-enabled build is usually undesirable since it unnecessarily limits
compatibility between packages.

Some concrete examples of such issues have been discussed in the `Environment
marker for free-threading`_ Discourse thread:

- Cython has (experimental) support for free-threading only in its master
  branch, and is used by a lot of projects that already publish ``cp313t``
  wheels. Picking up the wrong Cython version is causing a lot of obscure build

>   failures and runtime crashes. It would be quite beneficial if the metadata

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  failures and runtime crashes. It would be beneficial if the metadata
```

  could express that (c.f. `Require Cython Pre-release for Free-Threaded
  Python`_).
- CFFI has no support for free-threading yet, and `Armin Rigo, one of the
  maintainers, has stated
  <https://github.com/python-cffi/cffi/pull/143#issuecomment-2580781899>`__
  that it may be a good idea to fork ``cffi``, implement support for
  free-threading, and only come back to the CFFI project with a single large PR
  that adds support after the functionality "is reasonably well-tested (either
  as tests or, better in this case, tested by being in use in various other
  projects)". There are a lot of projects that depend on ``cffi``. They are
  likely fine to start depending on a fork for free-threading only, however
  depending on a fork for >=3.13 or for all Python versions seems like a much
  larger ask, and more disruptive for distribution packagers.

While these concrete examples may be addressed later this year by Cython and
CFFI making compatible releases, the same issue is going to repeat further up
the stack. The free-threading rollout is expected to take several years, and an

> environment marker for free-threading will make that rollout significantly less
> bumpy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
environment marker for free-threading will make that rollout significantly easier.
```

Another important ABI feature that is not yet covered by environment markers is
the bitness of the interpreter. In most cases, the ``sys_platform`` or
``platform_system`` markers are enough, because there's only a single bitness
in use per platform. This is not the case on Windows however: both 32-bit and
64-bit Python interpreters are widely used on x86-64 Windows. Not being able to

> distinguish between the two may be relevant for packages that provide C
> extensions. For example, SciPy does not provide ``win32`` wheels (it isn't able

Reviewer: I imagine this also applies to C++, Rust, etc
```suggestion
distinguish between the two may be relevant for packages that provide compiled
extensions. For example, SciPy does not provide ``win32`` wheels (it isn't able
```

to due to the lack of a suitable 32-bit compiler toolchain with Fortran
support). Those wheels lacking can be awkward especially for projects where

> SciPy is an optional dependency only. In that case, it would be useful to be
> able to specify that SciPy is required *unless* the interpreter is a 32-bit one
> on Windows (c.f. `Require SciPy Unless on 32-bit win32`_) - it avoids users who
> install such packages to get failed from-source installs because of the missing
> wheels.

Reviewer: The second half of the sentence (after '-') doesn't make sense.
```suggestion
SciPy is an optional dependency only. In that case, it would be useful to be
able to specify that SciPy is required *unless* the interpreter is a 32-bit one
on Windows (c.f. `Require SciPy Unless on 32-bit win32`_), to avoid failed
from-source installations due to the missing wheels.
```

Rationale
=========

The intention of this PEP is to introduce its core features with minimal impact
on the existing ecosystem.
The existing grammar proposed in :pep:`508` lends itself to a straightforward
extension to include the new environment marker.

Adding ``sys.abi_features`` to the Python Standard Library

> ----------------------------------------------------------

Reviewer: Having read through the PEP, I think this subsection could probably be either (a) shortened or (b) merged into the Specification section and just have a sentence or two here describing how `abi_features` relates to `abiflags`.

Reviewer: I like the new wording, thank you!

The Python standard library already has one mechanism to provide information

> about the ABI of the interpreter, namely the ``sys.abiflags`` attribute.

Reviewer: Also `sysconfig`?

This attribute is a string that contains a number of flags, such as ``d`` for
debug builds, but it is not easily understood and not uniformly available.
The new ``sys.abi_features`` attribute is both and is designed to be a superset
of the information contained in ``sys.abiflags``, which is why we chose to

> include the ``debug`` feature.

Reviewer: 'is both' what? I think it would be better to describe this as "there is already a mechanism X, we introduce a new attribute Y, Y can be used for everything X did and also new capability Z". Currently, the introduction of the attribute is not very well described (e.g. this section doesn't mention it is a frozenset, which attributes will it contain, what format (integer with bitflags, set of strings, enum), etc).

The established ``sys.abiflags`` also has a direct link to the naming of
various filesystem paths. This can be convenient, but precludes its use for the
documentation of important ABI features that are *not* intended to impact these
paths.

The new ``sys.abi_features`` attribute provides a place for this, and because
it decouples the information from filesystem paths, it can offer significantly
more clarity.

A Forward Looking View on Free-Threaded Python
----------------------------------------------

> :pep:`703`, which is the accepted proposal for free threading, states that the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:pep:`703`, the accepted proposal for free threading, states that the
```

Phase II: Supported-but-not-default phase, we still anticipate a strong need
for the environment markers to help with the transition.

As free-threaded Python enters into Phase III: Default phase, the need for
the environment markers will decrease, though at this point it is not clear
that the GIL-enabled Python will be completely phased out (it may remain
available as a non standard build option). If it persists, the inverse need for
the ABI feature detection may arise.

Indeed, in all three phases it may be necessary for package authors to choose
specific versions of their dependencies based on the ABI features, with a shift
from GIL-enabled as default to free-threading as default over time.

The ABI features are designed with this in mind to guarantee usefulness and
simplicity for the foreseeable future in a changing Python ecosystem.

Specification
=============

The keywords "**MUST**", "**MUST NOT**", "**REQUIRED**", "**SHALL**",
"**SHALL NOT**", "**SHOULD**", "**SHOULD NOT**", "**RECOMMENDED**", "**MAY**",
and "**OPTIONAL**"" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
:rfc:`RFC 2119 <2119>`.

Teaser

> ------

Reviewer: I'm not sure a "Teaser" section should be in the Specification

Author: Agreed. With the more developed example section now, I think we can just remove this section here.

To give an idea of the new environment marker, here is a simple example.
For further examples, see the `Examples`_ section below.

Dependencies can be marked as required for a free threading build of python
using the following syntax::

    cython>3.1.0b1; "free-threading" in sys_abi_features

or, explicitly, for a gil-enabled build::

    cython; "free-threading" not in sys_abi_features

Concepts
--------

ABI features are a clear description of certain properties of the Python
interpreter. While some of these features can be queried already today, they
are not easily nor uniformly accessible.

Hence, the proposed feature MUST be made available via the Python standard
library as ``sys.abi_features``, and as the new environment marker variable
``sys_abi_features``.

ABI Features
''''''''''''

ABI features are intrinsic properties of the Python interpreter, expressed as
simple, understandable strings.
However, not all features are equally applicable to all Python interpreters or
Python versions. For example, the distinction between free-threaded and

> GIL-enabled interpreters is only relevant for CPython >=3.13, but the bitness

Reviewer: ```suggestion
GIL-enabled interpreters is only relevant for CPython 3.13 onwards, but the bitness
```

of the interpreter is relevant for all interpreters.

All interpreters MUST handle the following ABI features as stated.
ABI features that are restricted to particular interpreters MUST NOT be
provided by other interpreters.
The features are subdivided into groups and for each group there MUST be
exactly one feature present, except when the group is marked as optional, in
which case there MUST be at most one feature present.

``free-threading`` or ``gil-enabled`` (only CPython)
    If the Python interpreter is free-threaded, the ``free-threading`` feature
    MUST be present and the ``gil-enabled`` feature MUST NOT be present.
    Otherwise, the ``gil-enabled`` feature MUST be present and the
    ``free-threading`` feature MUST NOT be present.

> ``debug`` (only CPython, optional)

Reviewer: What about other interpreters that have analogues to ``--with-pydebug``?

Author: Initially, the intention was exactly to have this be more widely applicable, but the problem is that it is not clear what exactly would be guaranteed in general.

Is it just the addition of `sys.gettotalrefcounts()`? Perhaps also other Python API? Or maybe even some of the runtime checks mentioned in [the debug build documentation](https://docs.python.org/3/using/configure.html#python-debug-build)?

Limiting it to the debug builds of CPython keeps the correspondence with `"d" in sys.abiflags`, ensures that it's clear what to expect on CPython, and is clear in preventing other interpreters from creating potential confusion.
At the same time, it keeps open the possibility to later specify exactly what a debug build is in a more general manner and opening up the ABI feature to any interpreter that implements it at that time.

PEP: 780
Title: ABI features as environment markers
Author: Klaus Zimmermann <klaus_zimmermann@gmx.de>,
        Ralf Gommers <ralf.gommers@gmail.com>
Sponsor: Lysandros Nikolaou <lisandrosnik@gmail.com>
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Topic: Packaging
Created: 21-Mar-2025
Python-Version: 3.14
Post-History:

>   `5 Aug 2024 <https://discuss.python.org/t/60007>`__,

Reviewer: Bad suggestion, sorry
```suggestion
  `05 Aug 2024 <https://discuss.python.org/t/60007>`__,
```
